README.md, before:

## Rwanda Church Compliance Monitoring System (RCCMS)

RCCMS is a Java Swing desktop application (NetBeans/Ant project) designed to support **church compliance monitoring in Rwanda**.
It helps teams register churches, define inspection standards, record inspections, and produce compliance reports for decision‑making.

## The real-world problem (context)

In practice, compliance monitoring can be slowed down by:

- **Fragmented records** (paper files, spreadsheets, messages) that are hard to reconcile
- **Inconsistent inspection standards** or checklists between inspectors/teams
- **Limited visibility** into compliance status across sectors/districts
- **Slow reporting** when leaders need summaries for planning, follow‑ups, or enforcement

RCCMS centralizes these workflows so inspection data is structured, searchable, and reportable.

## Features

- **Authentication**: login/register with roles
- **Church management**: register & manage churches
- **Standards management**: define inspection standards
- **Inspection workflow**: create inspections + details
- **Reporting**: compliance reports and analytics dashboard

## Who it is for (stakeholders)

- **Regulators / local authorities**: view compliance summaries and prioritize follow‑ups
- **Inspectors**: perform inspections using consistent standards and capture results
- **Church administrators**: support corrective actions based on findings (where applicable)

## Typical workflow

1. **Register churches** and maintain accurate profiles
2. Define **inspection standards** (requirements/checklist)
3. Create an **inspection** and record **inspection details** per standard
4. Review **reports/analytics** to track compliance trends and outstanding issues
5. Plan **follow‑ups** based on evidence in the system

## Tech stack

- **Java**: JDK 8 (source/target 1.8)
- **UI**: Swing (NetBeans `.form` screens)
- **Database**: PostgreSQL
- **Build**: Ant (NetBeans)
- **Persistence**: JDBC utilities + (optional) JPA/Hibernate configuration

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

- **JDK 8**
- **NetBeans** (recommended for `.form` editing) or Ant installed
- **PostgreSQL** (local or remote)
- PostgreSQL JDBC driver on classpath

### Database setup

This repository is **safe for public GitHub**: it does **not** commit real database credentials.

To run locally, create a file named `db.properties` in the project root (it is ignored by git).
You can copy `db.properties.example` and edit it.

By default, the example is configured to connect to:

- **DB name**: `church_compliance_monitoring_system_db`
- **Host/port**: `localhost:5432`
- **User**: `postgres`
- **Password**: set your own locally (not committed)

The app reads DB settings from:

- `db.properties` (recommended), or environment variables:
  - `RCCMS_DB_URL`
  - `RCCMS_DB_USER`
  - `RCCMS_DB_PASSWORD`

Used by:

- **JDBC**: `src/rccms/server/util/DatabaseConnection.java`
- **JPA/Hibernate**: `src/rccms/server/util/JPAUtil.java` (persistence unit: `RCCMS_PU`)

### Run in NetBeans

- Open the project folder `RCCMS_1`
- Click **Clean and Build**
- Click **Run**

NetBeans main class is configured as:

- `rccms.RCCMS` (see `nbproject/project.properties`)

### Build/Run from command line (after building)

After NetBeans builds, it produces `dist/RCCMS_1.jar`.

From the `dist` folder:

```bash
java -jar "RCCMS_1.jar"
```

NetBeans will copy required jars to `dist/lib` and set the manifest Class-Path automatically.

## Project structure

- `src/rccms/client/`: UI and client-side helpers
- `src/rccms/common/`: shared domain classes + service interfaces
- `src/rccms/server/`: DAO + service implementations + database utilities
- `src/META-INF/persistence.xml`: JPA persistence configuration (Hibernate provider)
- `nbproject/`: NetBeans project metadata

## Screenshots

Preview (existing image in the repo):

![RCCMS Preview](src/rccms/client/view/3d-rendering-church-building(1).jpg)

Add your real UI screenshots here (recommended):

- `docs/screenshots/login.png`
- `docs/screenshots/dashboard.png`
- `docs/screenshots/inspection.png`

Then embed them like:

![Login](docs/screenshots/login.png)
![Dashboard](docs/screenshots/dashboard.png)

## Troubleshooting

- **Database connection error**: confirm PostgreSQL is running and your URL/user/password match.
- **Driver not found**: ensure PostgreSQL JDBC jar is on the project classpath in NetBeans.
- **CRLF/LF warnings on Windows**: safe to ignore; it’s just line-ending normalization.

## Data & privacy note

If you store personal data (e.g., inspector accounts, contact details), treat your database as confidential:

- Use strong passwords (never `123`)
- Limit access to the DB server
- Avoid committing secrets into git (this repo is set up to prevent that)

## License

MIT — see `LICENSE`.

Commit message:

README: add Rwanda problem statement

README.md, after:

## Rwanda Church Compliance Monitoring System (RCCMS)

RCCMS is a Java Swing desktop application (NetBeans/Ant project) designed to support **church compliance monitoring in Rwanda**.
It helps teams register churches, define inspection standards, record inspections, and produce compliance reports for decision‑making.

## Problem statement (Rwanda)

In Rwanda, the rapid growth of religious institutions has created significant challenges in maintaining safety and regulatory compliance. Currently, church registration, inspection, and monitoring processes are often handled manually through paper-based systems, leading to inefficiencies, safety concerns, and poor regulatory oversight.

Key challenges include:

- **Fragmented records** that are hard to store, search, and verify
- **Inconsistent inspection standards** between inspectors/teams
- **Limited visibility** into compliance status across areas over time
- **Slow reporting and follow-up** due to manual aggregation of findings

Some churches may operate without adequate safety measures, qualified leadership, or sufficient community considerations. RCCMS provides a computerized solution that enables government inspectors to register churches digitally, conduct standardized inspections, track compliance status, and generate comprehensive reports automatically through a user-friendly Java Swing interface integrated with a PostgreSQL database via JDBC.

## Features

- **Authentication**: login/register with roles
- **Church management**: register & manage churches
- **Standards management**: define inspection standards
- **Inspection workflow**: create inspections + details
- **Reporting**: compliance reports and analytics dashboard

## Who it is for (stakeholders)

- **Regulators / local authorities**: view compliance summaries and prioritize follow‑ups
- **Inspectors**: perform inspections using consistent standards and capture results
- **Church administrators**: support corrective actions based on findings (where applicable)

## Typical workflow

1. **Register churches** and maintain accurate profiles
2. Define **inspection standards** (requirements/checklist)
3. Create an **inspection** and record **inspection details** per standard
4. Review **reports/analytics** to track compliance trends and outstanding issues
5. Plan **follow‑ups** based on evidence in the system

## Tech stack

- **Java**: JDK 8 (source/target 1.8)
- **UI**: Swing (NetBeans `.form` screens)
- **Database**: PostgreSQL
- **Build**: Ant (NetBeans)
- **Persistence**: JDBC utilities + (optional) JPA/Hibernate configuration

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

- **JDK 8**
- **NetBeans** (recommended for `.form` editing) or Ant installed
- **PostgreSQL** (local or remote)
- PostgreSQL JDBC driver on classpath

### Database setup

This repository is **safe for public GitHub**: it does **not** commit real database credentials.

To run locally, create a file named `db.properties` in the project root (it is ignored by git).
You can copy `db.properties.example` and edit it.

By default, the example is configured to connect to:

- **DB name**: `church_compliance_monitoring_system_db`
- **Host/port**: `localhost:5432`
- **User**: `postgres`
- **Password**: set your own locally (not committed)

The app reads DB settings from:

- `db.properties` (recommended), or environment variables:
  - `RCCMS_DB_URL`
  - `RCCMS_DB_USER`
  - `RCCMS_DB_PASSWORD`

Used by:

- **JDBC**: `src/rccms/server/util/DatabaseConnection.java`
- **JPA/Hibernate**: `src/rccms/server/util/JPAUtil.java` (persistence unit: `RCCMS_PU`)

### Run in NetBeans

- Open the project folder `RCCMS_1`
- Click **Clean and Build**
- Click **Run**

NetBeans main class is configured as:

- `rccms.RCCMS` (see `nbproject/project.properties`)

### Build/Run from command line (after building)

After NetBeans builds, it produces `dist/RCCMS_1.jar`.

From the `dist` folder:

```bash
java -jar "RCCMS_1.jar"
```

NetBeans will copy required jars to `dist/lib` and set the manifest Class-Path automatically.

## Project structure

- `src/rccms/client/`: UI and client-side helpers
- `src/rccms/common/`: shared domain classes + service interfaces
- `src/rccms/server/`: DAO + service implementations + database utilities
- `src/META-INF/persistence.xml`: JPA persistence configuration (Hibernate provider)
- `nbproject/`: NetBeans project metadata

## Screenshots

Preview (existing image in the repo):

![RCCMS Preview](src/rccms/client/view/3d-rendering-church-building(1).jpg)

Add your real UI screenshots here (recommended):

- `docs/screenshots/login.png`
- `docs/screenshots/dashboard.png`
- `docs/screenshots/inspection.png`

Then embed them like:

![Login](docs/screenshots/login.png)
![Dashboard](docs/screenshots/dashboard.png)

## Troubleshooting

- **Database connection error**: confirm PostgreSQL is running and your URL/user/password match.
- **Driver not found**: ensure PostgreSQL JDBC jar is on the project classpath in NetBeans.
- **CRLF/LF warnings on Windows**: safe to ignore; it’s just line-ending normalization.

## Data & privacy note

If you store personal data (e.g., inspector accounts, contact details), treat your database as confidential:

- Use strong passwords (never `123`)
- Limit access to the DB server
- Avoid committing secrets into git (this repo is set up to prevent that)

## License

MIT — see `LICENSE`.
